# ADR-002: MVP Visualisation Data Backend

> STATUS: Proposed

## Context

The core of the data required for providing insights about environmental sustainability for an AWS customer comes from
AWS Cost and Usage Report (CUR). However, the dataset does not provide enough dimensions for fulfill the visualisation
needs supporting optimisation decisions. Further data from CloudWatch and other AWS APIs, as well as external reference
data are required.

## Decision

It was decided not to perform pre-processing on CUR data, neither to orchestrate data integration across the different
datasets. The MVP design is:

* to serve the Cloud Sustainability Dashboard directly from CUR raw data and CloudWatch Metrics
* the granularity of the CUR data ingested is configured to be daily rather
than hourly
* external reference data is statically loaded as Infrastructure as Code (IaC) on build/deploy time, with no further
data pipeline
* AWS API scraping is implemented as Lambda functions triggered by daily CloudWatch Event cron job, generalising the
estimated views of resources at the time of executing it
* complex visualisation correlating data from both CUR and AWS APIs will not be 
implemented for MVP
* AWS default CUR integration for Athena is used (Hive metastore kept up to date by Glue Crawlers triggered via 
file-drop S3 events

## Rationale

The main driver for the decision is time constraint. The MVP needs to be delivered quickly and cannot accommodate
implementation and orchestration of ETL processes, such as data preparation and integration. For reducing the
performance impact of running visualisation dashboards directly on raw data, CUR data granularity is set to daily and no
joins across CloudWatch and CUR (Athena) is made.

Data preparation was considered as better long-term solution, as well as having all data pre-aggregated and ready for
Athena, including ingesting CloudWatch and change to AWS resources in an event-driven fashion, for both correctness and
for enabling complex visualisations. For further releases, Apache 2.0 versions of the static datas could also be updated
via GitHub extraction jobs.

## Consequences

There are three main consequences of the decision:

* Only simple visualisations are supported for MVP, due to the potential performance impact of complex joins and
aggregations
* Most data will only be refreshed daily. Expectations must be set that it is not a real-time observability dashboard
* Performance of the dashboard may be affected with greater latency on certain visualisations, due to the nature of the
CUR raw data: wide-table with hundreds of attributes and suboptimal filtering for isolating compute from storage,
network and discarding records for services where is not yet possible to infer environmental impact 
* AWS API Scraping (the process is not idempotent, with non-deterministic state for short-lived AWS resources that are
changed or destroyed when process runs, specially if a process is backfilled on later date, where incorrect or missing
data will be generated
